Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
Norman Spenrad has strong opinions about science fiction in its place in today's world.
As a noted author who helped bring the science fiction new wave to this country, and as a
two-time president of the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spenrad's ideas should
be heard.
One thing he feels strongly about is that science fiction has not been treated fairly
by book reviewers.
As a category, it is treated very unfairly and very cavalierly by the powers that be,
which is mainly the New York Times book review and the New York Review of Books and the so-called
New York Literary Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the way books
are published.
These people, for instance, came down on the American Book Awards, succeeded in getting
science fiction knocked out of the American Book Awards.
As president of the Science Fiction Writers of America, Spenrad has worked for some changes
in the field.
He thinks general readers should be made more aware of science fiction's unique possibilities
and its genuine value.
We asked him if science fiction movies have a positive or negative influence on the public's
image of the field.
I don't think they detract from it either.
If there are some better, more sophisticated movies, they might help.
As it is, it's just kind of neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists.
I think it's positive and will prove to be positive in the long-range because a lot
of people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction, with which they are unfamiliar
through these movies.
If you look at the evolution in the movies, you find that in the earlier science fiction
movies, if you're going into space or whatever, you had to spend like half an hour setting
a thing.
This is a spaceship that takes off from the Earth.
People float around it.
You have to familiarize the audience with all this unfamiliar imagery.
Now they can just start a movie bang right off, in a galaxy far away.
Boom.
Here's a spaceship in the stromo pow.
In other words, the first half hour of the conventional old-time science fiction movie
is gone because people are now familiar with this imagery.
I think these movies have brought a lot of new people into familiarity with these images.
They made these images part of the popular culture.
These movies were mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
Years from now, assuming that these people ever read anything, they'll be ready to read
science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're ready to read literature of a more
serious kind at all, because they'll be familiar with the material, familiar with the literature.
It won't seem strange and weird to them because they will have grown up with it.
That's why I think magazines, even magazines like Star-Log say, in that sense will have
a long-term positive impact.
More with Norman Spinrad on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Norman Spinrad's best-known novel may be Bug Jack Barron, a book which has stirred controversy
in both England and America.
It was published in this country in 1969, and it's a different sort of science fiction
novel.
It's a good example of new wave science fiction.
Character and style are important, and it deals with social issues such as racism, the
establishment, drugs, the power of the media, and radical protests.
There is also a good deal of sex and violence in the book, and the language is highly colored.
But Spinrad, thanks to the plot of the book, conforms to traditional science fiction formulas.
Actually, what I was trying to do in a way, the book has a very traditional plot.
As far as I was concerned, it has a positive hero, it has a negative villain.
The hero wins, the villain loses.
All that stuff that is considered the traditional way of plotting a book.
And yet it's written in a different kind of way.
It kind of takes that superficial kind of plot and treats it in a realistic manner.
The protagonist, Jack Barron, is a powerfully influential television star who has a talk
show watched by 100 million people.
He uses the show as a battlefield to oppose corrupt elements of society.
Spinrad comments on Barron's use of power.
The book is about power.
It's about power itself as neutral as far as I'm concerned.
That's what people do with it that counts.
Barron is a guy who likes power and keeps referring to it as a drug.
And knows that he can become addicted to it.
And for that reason, has decided to stay away from it.
Then he gets drawn back into playing with power because he comes to the conclusion that
it's better for somebody who feels that way about power to be wielding it, than people
who don't have any self-consciousness about the dangers of wielding power.
So in that sense, it's a comment on the power of the media, but it's also a comment on the
morality of power, on the paradox of power, which is that if you leave power to be wielded
by people who do not see the dangers, the personal dangers, the psychological dangers
of being involved with it, then you end up with people like Benedict Howard, Ronald Reagan,
and Richard Nixon who do not have self-consciousness about the personal dangers, the moral dangers
of chasing after power.
Whereas somebody like Barron, who is certainly an imperfect person, as all people are, at
least his saving grace, if he has one, is that he is well aware of the personal dangers
of being involved in a quest for power.
When Spinrad tried to get the novel published in this country, he was unsuccessful.
So he tried and written.
But there was an outcry in Parliament against the book. He relates the story for us.
That novel had a lot of trouble. It was written under contract at double day.
They then rejected it. You have to remember the political climate of the era.
They didn't reject it. They said, we'll publish it if you cut out all the sex, all the swear words,
and all the politics, which was the whole book.
So it took a long time to resell that book here. In the meantime, I took it to Wilfred,
to a Wilfred conference, and Mike Murcock was there.
He read it, he locked it, and he serialized it in New World.
So the first publication was actually in England, in the magazine.
Now, halfway through the serialization, I forget exactly which part, Part 3, Part 4,
W. H. Smith, which was the biggest distributor, still is the biggest distributor in England,
refused to distribute the magazine because of the book in it.
Now at that time, New World had an arts council grant.
The arts council was in the organ of the British government.
Now the arts council supported the magazine against Smith publicly.
And so the flap in Parliament arose when certain right wing members of Parliament
were aghast that an organ of the British government, the arts council, was defending this kind of stuff.
And that's how it became a parliamentary issue.
Bugjack Baron is being made into a movie, with a screenplay by Harlan Ellison
and direction by radical filmmaker Costa Gavras. It should be interesting.
More with Norman Spinrad next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Cruz.
Norman Spinrad's 1979 science fiction novel, A World Between, signaled a change in his fiction.
Spinrad's early work usually contained either subtle or overt criticism of various aspects of society.
Bugjack Baron, the men in the jungle and agent of chaos are good examples of this type.
A World Between is also a socially-oriented novel, but there's a different element in it.
Spinrad explains.
I would say in general that up until, I guess, A World Between really, a lot of my stuff was kind of critical.
Critical of this, of existing societies, critical of various things that were going on.
A World Between is meant as a utopian novel, really, in a kind of way.
And it's a prescriptive kind of book.
It's more of a, instead of presenting critical images of other things,
the idea is to create a more positive image of a more positive kind of future.
I think if you spend enough time criticizing what exists,
at some point you have some kind of moral obligation to present something more positive and replaceably.
To replace what you find negative.
The setting for the novel is a fit one for a utopia.
It takes place on the planet Pacifica, a beautiful world of blue ocean and lush green islands that's been colonized by humans.
Inhabitants of Pacifica live private lives in their isolated islands.
There are no large urban centers to cause pollution, overpopulation or poverty.
Even though they are physically isolated, the Pacificans remain in close electronic contact with one another.
They govern themselves, in fact, with a tight media web that allows them to vote immediately on any issue of importance.
But into this idyllic world comes two opposed political forces from Earth,
bent on the ideological conquest of Pacifica.
One force is the Institute for Transcendental Science,
a powerful organization whose goal is galactic unity under their control.
They are extreme, and Spinrad says they have two basic flaws.
One is the unexamined subtle male, male chauvinist bias of their culture.
And the other one is the ultimate conviction that what they are doing is the absolute most important thing in the universe.
And therefore they are morally entitled to run over other people's cultures and desires.
Absolutism, I guess, would be the kind of theocratic absolutism would be their flaw.
The other force is the Femocrats, a militant women's liberation group that is also an extreme.
The struggle of these two groups for control of planets all across the galaxy is called the Pink and Blue War.
It's clearly a male-female conflict, and so far every planet the two sides have approached has ended up on one side or the other.
But Pacifica is different. Spinrad's utopia is a stable and intelligent one.
The Pacificans reject both extremes and even change the minds of a few of the combatants.
We asked Spinrad about reactions to the book. How did women, for instance, respond to the Femocratic women's livers?
The strange thing about the reaction to that book has been that a certain number of men have reacted in a kind of male liberal guilt, male feminist kind of reaction against that.
But at most part women have liked the book. Women have identified with it more than men.
And actually I even got one or two good reviews in feminist places.
I think that's not quite what I expected, but that seems to be the way it happened.
I have not gotten heavy feminist flanks from that a little bit, but not much.
Not much because I think women who are involved in feminism or have been, or know women who are, can recognize a certain aspect of the feminist movement in the Femocrats.
Whereas men who are trying to show how liberator they are would not dream of admitting such a thing.
A world between. A different sort of book for Norman Spinrad, and we'll have more on him tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
and here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Norman Spinrad's most recent novel, Songs from the Stars, was published by Simon and Schuster in 1980.
The book describes a fragmented future society in a world devastated by nuclear war.
This, of course, is a typical Spinrad theme.
But the novel also communicates the sense of wonder characteristic of good science fiction when it describes the marvels of contact with an alien civilization.
Society has split in two factions in Songs from the Stars.
One faction is an Aquarian society which bans all technology, in fact anything having to do with science, since this was what was responsible for almost destroying the Earth.
And the other faction are the black scientists who keep technology alive and maintain an illicit smuggling operation with the Aquarian Society.
Spinrad talks about these opposed factions.
It's a book about horror unity, I guess.
As usual, with Spinrad, the book's conflict reflects current social conditions.
And then, you know, a mirror is the present thing in our society.
Where on the one hand you have a great big space movement, people wanting to get into space, and all the old people and all that stuff.
On the other hand you have a real atavistic, neo-Luddite movement, an anti-nuclear movement which is really kind of willfully ignorant of a lot of things.
In a way, these are the two things that could bring about the crash.
And as well as what with some armaments.
So I think it's basically a book about the grand philosophical attempt at apoc.
Is to try and bridge the gap between science and reason and feeling emotion and mysticism.
And to point to a horror unity between the two things.
And away from the false dichotomies and false dualisms, which seem to be really destroying Western civilization.
The protagonist in the book is a laid back Aquarian, clear blue loo.
Along with his girl and a scientist, he travels up to a satellite circling the Earth.
There are the three of them receive communication from some incredibly advanced alien civilizations in another part of the galaxy.
With the knowledge sent by the helpful aliens, it seems the humans will solve their own problems, unite, and start progressing toward the stars once more.
We asked Spinrad that if and when we contact an alien civilization, is it likely they will be helpful rather than hostile?
As I said in the book, I do believe that any civilization that's going to last a million years,
it's going to be a million years or whatever, or even a hundred thousand years more advanced than us,
they've been around that much longer, had that much more advanced science.
If it's going to survive to that length of its own history, it's got to solve it, you know, it's got to be by that time.
Philosophically and emotionally pretty together, or who long since it destroyed itself.
I mean, we certainly will not survive a million years of our own history if it continues as it has, you know.
In order that any civilization that survives a million years of its own history,
has had to have gotten its political, psychological, and philosophical act together.
And I don't see why, you know.
And I do believe that if and when we run into that kind of really advanced civilization,
that they will, if not be directly, actively helpful,
certainly will be benign and will not be interested in either eating us, or conquering our planet, or blowing us up, or anything like that.
Songs from the Stars is a thoughtfully written book with a theme, but it's also good exciting science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Darrell Lane.
James P. Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from Yesteryear, is a fascinating blend of computers, space exploration, and genetic engineering.
It's about a robot probe that discovers a habitable planet ten light years from Earth,
but it's different than the usual probe imagined by science fiction authors.
Right. This one is equipped to manufacture human beings.
Hogan explains.
So why not let the machines fly the ship and make the people when you get there?
If we look at the progress made in molecular biology, genetic engineering, in the last couple of decades,
we already manufactured quite complex organic molecules to specifications, such as drugs and certain anaesthetics.
If we just extrapolate that a little further, who's to say you couldn't make a complete set of human DNA?
In other words, instead of sending bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space,
why not just store all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the computers
and create them when you have found a planet that the instruments say they could survive on?
So the computers make a race of humans, raise them, and place them on the planet.
It sounds a bit mechanical, a little inhuman perhaps, but Hogan thinks it could work out beautifully.
So here's the interesting possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos
that were created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the machines
does not really have to be a cold and sinister one at all.
It could be quite a charming and amusing one.
The interesting thoughts that the book starts to play with is here is a race of kids that are being raised by
some very rational, direct, down-to-earth entities
who don't double talk or deceive or have all these layers of human game-playing that we have to contend with.
And they're being raised completely without any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults
with their prejudices and hatreds and taboos.
A lot of the other nonsense is that make life so complicated in our society.
As you might expect, these machine-raised humans are eventually contacted by humans from Earth.
Let's imagine that a mission from Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is a 20-year voyage, maybe.
So we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people,
a space colony with engines, with its government, its military, its church organizations,
its commercial institutions, the whole of society in miniature with its time-proved mechanisms
for controlling and subordinating a population.
Which traditionally, a ruling elite through history has imposed itself by restricting the flow of wealth
and by offering protection either from real or imagined threats.
And so what happens when a race of machine-raised people eventually collides with a race of people-raised people?
And that's really what the story's all about.
Voyage from yesteryear will be out in paperback at the end of July.
Next week we'll have a series of shows on the works of James B. Hogan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
A production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.